[ Music ]
[ Silence ]
>> I've always found that
when life presents change,
especially big changes, I begin
searching for music to carry me
through to the other
side, new music.
On a much larger scale,
using music for change
and revolution became the
passion of Hank Shocklee,
a top producer in
the world of rap.
His most well-known
group was Public Enemy
who made the middle-class
white man shudder
but empowered a generation
of black youth
to reject the prevailing system
which was not working for them.
Hank is with us today to
talk about the ability
of music to shift perception.
And I just have to right
off the top toss something
out to you here.
Alex Grey, he's the
visionary artist --
I don't know if you've
seen any of his work --
but he's the one that shows
the kind of internal workings
of the human being, you know,
with the meridians
running through.
I was interviewing him one time
a few years ago and he said
to me that his opinion, the rap
artists were now the new shamans
of society.
Now, that -- at the time I was
trying to get my mind around it,
I didn't quite know
what he meant.
But you probably do
know what he meant.
So tell us what you think
he was saying at the time
>> Well, you know, I think
that, you know, for me,
I think that rap has --
it offers an expression that's
not found in R and B or found
in either music that
-- perhaps singers.
So I think that the
artist now can express more
so they can say more things.
And so -- and so I guess that it
empowered them to speak about,
you know, situations of
whatever is going on in the hood
or whether or not the -- the
injustice that was going on.
So I guess, yeah, in that
respect, I guess, yeah,
to me that would
be a modern-day --
>> Well, it was authentic,
speaking truth, speaking really
from the heart and the
head both, and what --
I heard a little bit
of your talk yesterday
and you gave a bit of background
in terms of the influences
in your life, and we're going
to go into that in a little bit.
But what was it that made you
throw yourself into the world
of helping produce these artists
to speak their messages
through rap?
>> Well, it's kind of
like I wanted to --
I wanted to be an artist
but I'm not an artist, so --
but I'm more of a producer
behind the scenes, but I wanted
to produce them because I --
their vision is my vision.
You know, when I started working
with Chuck, you know -- he --
to me, Chuck was like
a counterpart to me.
He was like my visionary,
my vocalist if you would.
He expressed what I wanted
to talk about deep inside.
So I got a chance
to kind of like work
with him and build with him.
And I mentor, you know.
So I mentor a lot of artists
before I even work with them
so we get a chance to
build on ideas and concepts
and understand what
relationships are and some
of the things that need to be
dealt with in the community.
And we try to, you know,
deal with those things music.
>> Uh-huh.
The movie "8 Mile."
"8 Miles"?
"8 Mile"? << Uh-huh.
>> Yeah. That was the
first time I really got it.
I mean up to that time, I
didn't understand the art form
that well.
I mean, I'm a West Coast
middle-aged white woman
and I have a lot of
musical interest,
but I didn't really get it.
And when I saw the amount
of heart and wit and poetry
and just -- just quick
wittedness that was behind it,
it gave me a new
appreciation for it.
And I would like to find
out from your perspective,
when you were trying
to find artists,
what are these guys like?
What do you look for to find
someone that has that intense
and intelligence and
ability to express?
>> Well, I mean, the first
thing I look for is sound.
Everything to me comes
-- starts with the sound.
And I look for a voice
that's different and unique.
And then I look for,
you know, the fact that,
like you said, the quick wit.
I look for, you know,
your metaphors.
I look for things
that they can --
they can put together,
relationships.
You know, they can take --
they can take what is --
what is visual and
communicate it
and verbalize what
they see every day.
And those are the
kinds of things.
And when you're talking about
with the "8 Mile" situation,
what, you know, we
produce things --
they call those "open mics," and
what they are is like they --
>> It's like a competition.
It's a sound off.
>> Exactly.
And those things are the
classic ways of finding really,
really good talent, because
anybody that can kind a
like battle their way in with
a bunch of other rappers,
those are the guys that
you want to go after.
>> Well, and that's -- I mean,
what an exciting
process to go through.
I mean, what's it like?
I mean, give me an idea of a few
of the people who were are just
so smart it blew your mind.
>> Well, let's talk
about Chuck, you know.
When I found Chuck, I was
at a Adelphi University --
just a frat party, and in that
time, you know, there was a lot
of emcees that they had.
When they play a certain
record, like when they play
"Good Times," all the
emcees would want to rhyme.
And so all these emcees
are rhyming and there's
about a dozen of them rhyming.
They was all terrible.
And so when I heard
Chuck, Chuck came
and actually just did an
announcement for another event
that was going on, and his
sound and delivery was so crisp
and so precise that I went
over to him and I said, "Look.
I want you to see if you
wanted to be an emcee
in my -- do my DJ outfit."
He said, "I don't know.
We'll see."
And so it took me like a year
to convince him to be an emcee.
And then from that
point I consider
that to be the training grounds.
And then from then, he kind of,
like, you know, we learned a lot
about development and how to
show and how to be an emcee
and how to keep the crowd going
and the things that needs to be,
you know, things that they --
you need to do to be
a charismatic showman.
>> So really they're
coming more to the area
of poetry than anything else.
These guys are more
poets then singers.
I mean, right?
>> I think you have to be.
I mean, you have to be able
to take what is every --
mundane, everyday
life and glamorize it,
but at the same time, put
it in a poetic fashion
so that people would get
it and they wouldn't --
and it would be entertaining
to them.
And I think that that's --
and to me, I always look for
poets first, because I think
that poetry is -- if
you're a good poet,
then you could be a
sensational rapper.
It's just because I think
that the tendencies are
pretty much the same
>> We were talking off-camera
at dinner last night,
just kind of seeing
where we wanted --
what we wanted to
talk about today,
and one of the things
you mentioned,
a lot of people listen to rap,
especially like I mentioned
in my open, when Public
Enemy came out, I mean,
there were a lot of white people
who were like, oh, my God.
What's going on?
What's going to happen to us?
Right? It was scary.
And yet at the same time,
you're saying, if you're looking
at really toxic music,
go to the Top 40.
What did you mean by that?
>> Well, I think that today,
a lot of music is not --
is not communicating what
the community is about,
or not reflecting the community.
And if you look back at the
early, you know, '70s records,
and even the '60s records,
all those records, you know,
they defined an era because
they reflected what was going
on in the community.
And I think that,
you know, artists
and great music reflects
the community's values.
And I think that today
that doesn't happen.
What happens is that the
values are being projected
so you're getting this kind of
hyper-reality, this fake reality
of artists that's projecting
these lavish lifestyle
that really doesn't -- that
doesn't happen in the community.
>> I think everybody can
relate to the inauthenticity
and falseness of
what's being projected.
So that is trumped up for
purpose, narcotization,
part of the narcotization
of the masses.
>> It's part of selling.
You know, I mean, today
it's all about advertising.
I mean, when we was -- you
know, when we were coming
up in the time of the early
part of rap, it was -- it was --
it was not cool to be
associated with products.
It was not cool to advertise.
And matter of fact, it
was just the opposite:
You wanted to be
against the system.
against advertising.
You wanted to be
against products.
for the community.
You wanted to be for something
that stood greater than --
than just selling and
just commercialism.
>> Yet at the same time,
you were so successful
in your efforts that it
started looking like that
to the outside; lots of success,
lots of money, and so forth.
>> But -- and so then
what that leads us to --
to the next level, which now
we start to talk about that.
And I think that, you know, for
me, good art doesn't really talk
about what it has, the
money that it's about.
I think good art always talks
about issues and problems,
because it doesn't matter
how much money we have,
we all want to have --
we all have issues and
we all have problems
>> Right. No, that's true.
I mean, that's made abundantly
clear in all the tabloids.
I mean, and a lot
of the rap artists,
like a lot of the athletes,
like a lot of movie stars made
their way to the top of that.
And so what was it like dealing
with that behind the scenes
where you have people
who come in,
they're -- they have purpose?
First of all, were you looking
for a [cough] -- excuse me --
a tone that had kind of
some hunger or anger to it
to really project
that information forward
in an authentic way?
>> Well, I was looking
for honesty.
>> Yeah.
>> And I think that the
first thing you look
for in any situation is,
you want to make sure
that whatever the artist that
you're working with comes
across as honest as possible.
Now, if you're an angry
person and that's your --
and that's your thing, well,
then I want to accentuate that.
You know, if you're --
if comedy is your thing,
then we want to accentuate that.
You know, if being cool and
being smooth and debonair
and being a ladies'
man is your thing,
that's what you want
to accentuate.
You don't -- you want to --
you want to highlight the
strong points of any artist,
and you want to eliminate all
those weak points, if you would.
>> Yeah. And so it seemed
like that particular genre,
because you were
looking to -- as an --
you said initially that
you did it is an experiment
to see how it would affect kids
if it would kind of get them
up to taking some kind of
responsibility, action,
or whatnot in their own lives.
And so that seems that anger
is oftentimes a useful kind
of motivating force for people.
And if you're talking
about the black community,
the inner-city black community,
there's justifiable
reason to be pretty angry.
>> Well, we were angry.
>> Yeah.
>> We were angry
as kids coming up.
We were angry because the system
wasn't treating us fairly.
We was angry because our
parents had to work two
and three jobs just to
put food on the table.
And we was angry because
the community was -- was --
was impoverished with
drugs and all kinds
of things that was going on.
I mean these are things that we
see every day that affects us.
You know, we didn't like
the fact that we had
to learn certain --
certain things in school
that we were taught
that had nothing
to do with our experience.
>> Totally irrelevant
to your lives.
>> Exactly.
So yeah, you know.
And I -- you have to understand.
I didn't grow up in
a city in the hood.
I grew up in a suburb -- in the
suburbs, and so we had to deal
with racism as a -- as a --
as a force that was
against us every day.
>> And in that sense that has
to be true where if you're
in the inner-city, at least
you're accepted by your friends
and your relatives
and associates.
But not so in the suburbs, huh?
>> No. So -- so therefore,
that gave us a different kind
of anger, and it taught us a lot
about how to control that anger
and how -- you know, or how
to find ways of channeling
that anger into other things,
and so it teaches
you to organize.
It teaches you to do things
to teach you, you know,
we've learned from our
black American experience
that we would have at the
Adelphi University where we --
where we would take all the --
all the kids from the same hoods
or the same areas in the
suburbs and bring them together
in a summer camp program
where they can learn --
where we can learn
about ourselves.
And that was a very key thing
for, you know, for us because,
you know, we didn't learn
about ourselves in school.
We had to -- those are things --
those were subjects that we had
to learn about -- we had
to learn about history --
that the white histories.
European histories.
We had to learn about those
histories and we never learned
about black or African
histories.
>> Right. And so that anger
really was a fuel that was used
to propel the poetry
of a lot of the men
that you ultimately signed
and started producing for.
Now, what happened
over their careers
when they started
getting traction
and they started
becoming very popular?
With a did they stay close
to the authentic juice
that started the whole thing,
or was there a corruption
that usually happens
with fame and money?
>> Well, that's a
very good question.
And what happens a lot
of times is that when --
now when we become accepted,
that's a whole other issue
to deal with, because now, you
know, people always say that,
you know, do people
change or do the --
or do the situations
change around you
that forces you to change?
And I think that a lot
of times, you know,
your surroundings change.
And so now -- now these artists
who've never dealt with success
at that level -- and meaning
success is being acceptedness,
they'd never dealt
with that, so now --
>> And adulation.
>> Exactly -- so now
it's coming back at them.
And for people who
have never dealt
with it before have all
different types of ways
that they deal with it.
Some -- you know, some -- you
know, don't deal with it all.
Some go into what I consider
reverse mode where they --
were they do everything
the opposite
of what they should
be doing, you know,
which becomes self-destructive.
You know, and then some people
just decide to take it on
and take on a new persona from
that level, and I'm gonna --
instead of me dealing with it,
I'm going to bathe myself in it.
I'm going to bask in that --
in this glory, and I'm going
to constantly keep -- I mean,
so now I've a big head
about what I'm doing.
Now I think I'm the -- I'm
the end-all and be-all.
And I think that, you
know, that happens as well.
But it --
>> And it's not -- that's
not exclusive to musicians.
That's human nature.
>> Exactly.
>> You have a choice to
make when you're confronted
with success, and as you say,
most people don't
have the opportunity
to make those decisions
in that way.
>> Well, I think that success --
you know, people think that
success, you know, ruins you.
I think that success
highlights it.
I think it brings out your
true nature, because --
because now you don't have
-- you can't hide it now.
Now it's going -- it's
going to allow itself
to flow out naturally.
>> It seems that you've been
able to kind of keep your head.
You know, if you look you up
online, you don't have a bunch
of scandals surrounding
you or anything.
How you were able to keep your
own head through all of this?
What was your grounding
principle?
>> Man, that's another
good question.
I just think I've -- I've
-- I'm all about community.
I'm all about the development
of communities and self.
And keeping a level head, it's
because when you look around,
there's so many things that are
wrong that hasn't been fixed.
And -- and there's
always something
that needs to be fixed.
So therefore, for me, it's
nothing to get bigheaded about.
It's, I'm -- I feel like I'm on
a mission to change the planet
and to create a higher
consciousness with everyone.
And I just happen to
use music as my tool
because that's what I'm --
that's what I'm good at.
But that's -- but that's
something that's dear
to me that's always been with
me, that's been instilled
to me from my grandmother.
>> Yes, and through
your parents.
We're going to get into that,
a little bit of history.
And also the history
of this country
and the whole black music
scene from the 19 --
we'll go from the 1960s forward.
But first of all,
let's go back to 1988
and take a little
look at Public Enemy.
Okay. And they were
performing on Yo!
MTV Raps. Okay?
>> All right.
>> You understand
until you hear the man,
your book of the new school
rap game, writers treat me
like Coltrane, insane.
Yes to them but to me,
I'm a different kind.
We're brothers of the
same mind, unblind.
Caught in the middle
and not surrenderin'.
I don't rhyme for
the sake of riddlin',
some claim that I'm a smuggler.
Some say I never heard of ya,
a rap burglar, false media.
We don't need it, do we?
It's fake that's what
it be to ya, dig me?
Yo, Terminator X,
step up on the stand
and show these people
what time it is boy.
Here we go again.
Don't, don't, don't, don't,
don't believe the hype.
Don't believe the hype,
Don't believe the hype.
Don't, don't, don't,
don't, don't, don't,
don't believe the hype.
Everybody say don't
believe the hype.
Say don't believe the hype.
Don't believe the hype.
Say don't, don't, don't,
don't, don't believe the hype.
>> Whoa. That's a
blast to the past.
Twenty-five years ago.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. What's it like for
you watching it now all these
years later?
I mean --
>> Oh, it's still good.
>> -- where's it take you.
>> It still looks good.
And, you know what?
It's still relevant, you know.
>> Don't believe the hype.
It's more relevant now.
I think were more
narcotized now than we were
when you created
that in the '80s.
>> True.
>> And that's all of society.
>> Exactly.
And, you know, and it's funny
because it seems like, you know,
even if you go back
to the '70s records
and the stuff they were saying
in the '60s up until now,
it doesn't seem much
has changed.
It seems that we've
got -- we got a lot --
we have lot more technology.
We've got a lot more success.
We got a little more glamorous.
We have things.
But the core is still the same.
>> It is the same; however, I
would argue it might even --
we might be a little worse
off right now in the sense
that at least during those days,
if you are a kid in school,
any school, anywhere, you
usually had art classes,
maybe you had music,
PE, things like that,
that developed the whole human
being and at least allowed you
to have a thread
of creativity left.
That's gone.
That's been squashed out
in favor of, you know,
kind of the classic
sciences and technology.
And that's a big one.
Because for you, creativity
really was what you --
your whole world was
about creativity.
>> Well, that's why the kids now
go to video games is because,
you know, kids have to have
an out -- have to have an --
have to have an outlet
expression.
They have to have
some sort of outlet.
And I think that if you don't
-- if you limit people's outlets
of expression, then what
you end up having is,
you create this drone
society where kids don't --
where people become
insensitive to anything.
>> True.
>> And so what you --
so what we're doing now,
we're taking the creativity
away from the youth
and we're forcing it down
this channel of being
in the video world,
which is some matrix,
which is a whole
other set of issues.
>> Oh, big time.
And that, it really was what you
were fighting against back then,
and why you started
this particular genre.
Right?
>> Yeah. To try to enlighten
and try to -- and to inspire.
>> Right. But it was scary to
a lot of people nonetheless.
And one thing women really
were pissed off about is
that there were a lot of
misogynistic lyrics in some
of the rap -- with
some of the rap groups.
What was your take on that?
What was going on?
>> Well, I think that, you
know, I've never really indulged
in any of those type
-- I don't --
I don't produce those kind of
records or anything, you know,
but I can -- I can -- what
I can say is that, you know,
there's always been a battle
in especially the black
community amongst the men
and the women.
I mean, we have -- you know,
we have "Essence Magazine,"
"Jet Magazine," and
they're all --
is constantly coming back with
these things of "10 Things
that Your Man Don't
Do," you know.
So they always making
these kind of parallels
between men and women.
>> So you had a lot of
friction going on to begin with.
>> Exactly.
And I think that, you know, it
does our community a disservice
when we're fighting
amongst each other,
especially when you're talking
about amongst the sexes.
Because I think that there's
-- I think that there's --
everybody has situations
and you have issues,
but I think that harmony is
a better tool for us today
than us going at each other.
>> Yeah. I think
even some people who,
like they've live seen "8 Mile"
or whatnot, people like me
who would say, "God, that stuff
is really intensely intelligent
and interesting and poetic."
But then you year some
of the rap artists
that are saying some pretty
nasty stuff about women
and it's like, I can't
go there anymore,
and then you tune
the whole genre out.
And I think that happened
with a lot of people.
>> Yeah, and that's unfortunate.
Because -- but a lot
of times these --
the artists that are
doing it, they're doing it
because they're either being
coached by their record company
or their A and R person, or
they're looking at the game
from another perspective
that's saying, oh, well,
this guy did this particular
record and it worked,
and so I'm going to
follow in that suit.
So a lot of -- it's a lot
of monkey-see-monkey-do,
if I may use that phrase,
in the business as well.
But I think that if you -- if
you poll and sit down with a lot
of the artists that
are making the records,
that's not a general
consumption of how they feel --
conception, I should
say, of how they feel.
>> Yeah.
>> And they -- they -- they're
more intelligent than that.
They have -- they have levels of
complexity and dimension to them
that they're not able to
express because of they're
in this tight box, they have
to be this certain type of --
project this image of
this artist that they may
or may not necessarily
agree with.
>> Well, it was kind of
a degenerative cycle,
but the same thing was
happening outside in the world
of what now has become
reality television.
I mean, it just became coarse.
Communications and entertainment
of all kinds started
becoming demeaning
and coarse across the board.
So why would rap be
exempt from that trend?
I mean, of course is going
to show up there, too.
>> Well, if you go back
into the early '70s records,
everything was about upliftment.
>> Yes.
>> And then right at the
end, I should say more
like the beginning -- be mid-90s
that frequency started
to change.
>> Going downward.
Downward spiral --
>> Exactly.
>> -- and we're in it.
>> And it started
to get away from --
get away from harmony and
got away into more discord,
even to the point where
[inaudible] started to come
into the game, and that's
all part of what I consider
to be a whole other plan to keep
everybody in the state of fear,
to keep everybody in
the state of being
against each other
or against odds.
That's what this whole
thing about, you know,
this whole psychic war on
terror and everything else,
or see something, say
something, you know.
This is -- this is all part
of, to me, a bigger plan
to make us all inherently
afraid of everything --
>> Absolutely.
>> -- so that we do
not understand or get
into our full potential,
which is our connection
that we have to each other.
>> Absolutely.
And then the black community
had another challenge
that it had to go through.
And in my work I do all kinds
of interviews, you know,
and you can call some of them
conspiracy, although most
of them are not conspiracies,
they're realities.
And one of the realities is
that from the Vietnam War
there was a lot of drugs --
there were a lot of drugs that
were taken out of Vietnam.
That was kind of the black
ops industry's cash cattle.
And they were distributed
to the inner-city youth.
And this created just
a horrendous impact
on the black inner-city
youth in particular.
What -- how do you see that --
I mean, what was going
on from your perspective?
What did it do to
your neighborhoods?
to your families?
>> It decimated it.
I mean, you're talking about
my older cousins, my older --
my uncles, and they were strung
out on heroin, a lot of them,
and so it killed a big
chunk of our community.
A lot of the -- our leaders,
a lot of our revolutionary
partners that was out there,
whether it be the Black
Panther Party or any
of these organizations that were
about upliftment of black youth
at the time, all have been
decimated, either put in jails
or they're in the jail
-- or they're in graves.
And the drugs was
a big part of it.
And we're still fighting
the drugs, you know.
It just moves --
>> It's not like
it's not happening.
It's still happening.
It's a cash cow for
the black ops.
>> Yeah. And it moves --
and it moves from heroin from
the '70s to crack in the '80s.
And at the time when we
was producing Public Enemy,
crack was destroying
our communities.
And crack was something that
was ridiculously dangerous.
I mean, every -- it was
almost to the point where one
in every household had
a relative or someone
in the household that
was strung out on crack.
And so when you -- and when you
think about what it did for --
what it does for
you, it makes you --
it makes you almost
comatose in a way.
So now all you want to do is get
that next high, that next fix,
so now you get people that
are breaking in houses.
You got families that are
breaking up because the sister
or brother is strung out on it.
>> The jails are filling up.
>> Exactly.
So -- so -- so our
communities are becoming --
are becoming like these
battlegrounds as opposed
to it being a community.
>> Yeah. And it just
seemed to me that there's --
the targeting -- it was really
a targeting that occurred.
And you can say it
was all about profit,
but I think there was
another fear factor behind it:
To shut the black youth up.
Dull them down.
Get them out of the way.
What were they so afraid of?
in your opinion.
>> I'm not sure what
they were afraid of,
but I think that it
was part of a plan
to just keep everybody down.
Because you have to
understand something.
The black community doesn't live
in a community isolated
to itself.
The black -- you know, the
black community is a subset
of a wider community.
And whatever goes on in the
black community, eventually goes
on in the wider community.
So if you -- it's almost like if
you want to say it's targeted,
it's targeted because
if it starts there,
it's going to end
up somewhere else.
And so -- you know,
so where do you do?
You hit -- you hit the what is
known as the "target market"
so that you can -- so that it'll
eventually see the wider market.
Because now you got white
kids coming into the hood --
>> You bet.
>> -- buying crack.
You got, you know
-- you got the --
you know, you have the
Latino kids buying it.
You know, so when you
think about it now,
you're destroying not only
just the black communities,
but you're destroying the
mainstream communities as well.
And it's just a unfortunate
situation
>> It's terrible.
And so what I'd like
to do now is go back --
I just talked about the '60s.
We know that that kind of
nefarious thing was going
on starting in the '60s,
flooding the communities.
So let's look at how the social
messages were changing in music.
If you're just kind of indulge
me a little bit and give us kind
of like a thumbnail sketch
of what was happening
with black music and the
messages from the '60s.
>> Well, the messages were
simple: It was about love.
It was about getting
your act together.
It was about talking
about some of the issues
of whether it be alcoholism that
was out there, or whether it be,
you know, drugs in
the community.
It was about -- it was
about upliftment, you know,
and everything was about
-- was positive and upbeat.
>> It was trying to
kind of reach out
and give a helping hand
if someone was down
or struggling or whatnot.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
>> And -- and so -- and
it was also unifying.
It had a unifying message.
And the message was -- you know,
for me, the message was simple.
It was like -- it was like,
to get to your higher
consciousness,
understand what's
going on around you,
help uplift the community
that you have
around you, teach the youth.
You know, it was
all about, you know,
about how to make your community
and your situation better.
>> Which were a couple of
the top artists you would say
that were really conveying
those messages well in the '60s?
>> Oh, you're talking --
whether it be Marvin Gaye or --
>> James Brown.
I mean -- I mean,
pretty much every artist
that you can think of,
you know, whether --
you know, was Cool and
the Gang, or the --
you know, every artist that
you can think of were all
about doing something that was
positive for the community,
because they all came
from the community.
>> And most of it was
really feel-good music.
>> Yes.
>> I mean, we all loved it.
And a lot of it even found
their way to the Top 40.
[Chuckling]
>> Exactly.
And made some money, which was
[inaudible] which was nice.
>> Yeah. And so now we
going into the '70s.
We have the Vietnam War.
You just mentioned Marvin Gaye,
and this one particular song I
think that everyone that listens
to this will remember and
was beloved to all of us.
So let's take a look at what
Marvin Gaye was doing, 1971.
[ Music ]
Mother, mother, there's
too many of you crying.
Brother, brother, brother,
there's far too many
of you dying.
You know we've got to find a way
to bring some lovin' here today.
Father, father, We
don't need to escalate.
War is not the answer, for
only love can conquer hate.
You know we've got to find a way
to bring some understandin'
here today.
Picket lines and --
Who doesn't love that one?
>> It's great.
>> And, I mean, it
breaks your heart, too,
because it's been done so
sweetly and so sensitively,
almost like a heart crying out.
We don't need that.
We don't need the war.
We don't need to be doing
this to each other anymore.
So let's talk about
the Vietnam War.
You had personal
experiences in your family.
What was going on in your life
and what you were learning.
I think you had a cousin
that returned from the war.
What were you learning
about what was happening
on the other side of the world
and how is that reflected back
in music during that era?
>> I mean, it was
an amazing time
because when my cousin
would come back,
he would tell me stories that,
you know -- because, once again,
he was a mechanic in the Air
Force, and so he was also
in charge of bringing off
the bodies, and, you know,
he tells me, like, you
know, every day, like,
he's shipping home
bodies of kids
that were basically
killed in war.
And you don't even
understand how --
what that means until
if you -- if you --
in the time when I was coming
up, you know, you're talking
about there was a
draft, you know.
At the minute that a kid
turned 18, you had to,
you know, sign up for the --
>> Put your name
into the lottery.
>> -- draft, and you
could be -- exactly --
and you could be
shipped off to war.
So what happens is,
they'll give you, what,
six weeks basic training
and then throw you
in a war situation, and
then you have to figure out
and try to survive that.
And you're talking about kids
that never knew anything
about that.
You know, they lived a normal
lifestyle of just, you know,
playing baseball or football
or whatever the case may be.
Now they're carrying a
gun and they're having
to go kill and -- to stay alive.
That was something that not
many people can deal with.
And so, you know, when
he was coming back,
he was telling me these things,
kind of like, it resonated to me
so big because, you know,
I could've been gone.
But it just so happened
that I, you know,
we had escaped the
draft had ended
at the time before
I was able to,
you know, be eligible for it.
And so what it did was it --
the music that he
brought back reflected it.
>> What kind of music
was he bringing back?
>> Oh, anything from the
Funkadelics, you know, to,
you know, Parliament
Funkadelic was his favorite.
That created an escape for him.
You know, of course,
James Brown;
of course, Wilson Pickett.
You know, you think about
Earth, Wind, and Fire.
You think about -- I mean, you
think about a lot of the groups
that -- you think
about Bob Marley,
you think about Peter Tosh,
you think all these groups
that he brought back that --
and it was all different
genres of music.
And -- and bringing it back, but
they all had a central message,
whether it was Sly
and the Family Stone,
or whether it was Jimi Hendrix,
they all had a central message,
and the message that
they was talking
about was basically,
no more war.
We want peace.
We want to build
our communities.
We want love.
We want understanding.
>> Was there any difference,
during the Vietnam War
in particular, when you
had some much strife,
so many troubles already,
you had the drug problems
had started by that time?
Was there any difference
within the inner cities
with people being asked to
go fight for this country
than would you guess there was
anywhere else in the country?
>> Well, nobody wanted
to fight, you know.
But you got to keep in mind that
you're put into that situation,
and once you're put in
that situation, well,
then, you have to respond.
And I think that, you know,
a lot of people responded
different ways.
There was a lot of people
that was dodging, that would,
you know, escape to
Canada, you know.
And that's how they
dealt with it.
But a lot of the musicians
that came out that --
they dealt with it
by singing about it,
by raising the consciousness
about it.
And I think that by them raising
the consciousness about it,
created a sentiment and a tone
that allowed even for the people
to understand what was
going on in Vietnam,
because if you understand
back in -- back in that time,
we were isolated from
news and information
about what was actually
going on over there.
If it wasn't for the artists
that was singing about this,
gave -- gave -- gave back --
gave the community
something to look for now.
Now all of a sudden, journalists
started asking questions.
Now all of a sudden, we starting
to find out want to find
out more about what is this
war in Vietnam, because a lot
of people didn't even know it
was a war that was going on.
We just knew that we was
fighting some war over there.
Nobody knew what it was
about, what it was for,
and so it was the
consciousness of these artists
that raised the consciousness
of everyone else that became --
that became, you know, fighters
and started to, you know,
antiwar movements
and different things,
and that's what in
turn ended that --
>> That was very powerful music
that came out at that time.
And, of course, since then,
what they were talking about at
that time has since been
validated because, you know,
declassified documents
and so forth have shown us
that the war was primarily
something, you know,
a figment of Kissinger's
imagination, you know,
and the players for
various reasons having to do
with resources and so forth.
It wasn't a little
legitimate war to begin
with that we should have
been involved in anyway.
And these guys must've --
you can't be on the ground
in that kind of field
of consciousness and not see
or feel something's
wrong with this picture.
Why am I killing these
people, these women and kids?
You know, so that had --
the music did a really
beautiful job, I think,
of bringing that kind
consciousness of the surface.
>> Yes, it did.
>> Yeah. So that was the '70s.
Okay. Now we're hitting it into
the '80s, and you come along,
Public Enemy comes along toward
the latter part of the '80s.
But what was happening
in the early '80s
in the consciousness
of what was going on?
>> The consciousness was
back then was all about,
I want to get accepted
into the wider society.
I want to be affluent now.
Now money is and
became the key thing.
Now I want to go to
the clubs when --
you talking about the disco
era, now it becomes, you know,
it's red -- it's red carpet.
It's velvet rope.
It's all like --
it's all exclusive.
It's all I want to be
seen and I want to be --
and I want to wear
the best clothes,
and I just want to go out.
I want to forget
about the struggle.
I want to forget about
anything that's conscious.
I want to -- I want to --
I want to sit over here
and sniff cocaine
and just chill out --
>> I want to have my
place at the table
>> Exactly.
And so now -- so now
when you think about it,
that that brought on --
that's what the whole
disco era was all about.
And, you know -- you know,
me watching this from afar,
was saying like,
well, wait a minute.
They're still wrong and
things that are happening
in the community that
no one's addressing.
And I remember when I was
at college and I was in --
on campus, and there
was a woman that was --
a girl at the time I was there,
and she was selling a red,
black, and green button that
said, "Save the Children."
And she was just asking for
maybe a dollar for the button.
And everybody was walking by
her like she didn't exist.
And they were looking
at her like -- like --
like, why is she talking
about save the children?
and what's this red, black,
and green thing, you know?
And the red, black, and green
represented the black --
it was like our own black
national flag, you know.
It was the colors
that symbolizes unity
amongst black people.
And with the save the children,
the message to me was clear:
It was about the kids.
And for people to
be ignoring her,
kind of like registered
something to me,
and it said, you know something.
If I could build something or do
something or if I have a voice
in something, I want to
be able to answer that.
And so thus, you know,
having the chance
to produce Public Enemy gave
me a chance to answer that.
>> How did it go
when you first --
when this phenomenon first
started, how was this accepted
by the inner-city
youth to begin with?
I mean, it must've
been like manna.
>> They didn't understand it.
You know, I mean, we was told
everything from, you know,
conscious music will never sell.
You know, conscious --
nobody wants to hear
anything about conscious rap.
They want -- at the time, if you
noticed anything that was going
on in the hip-hop community
was all about party raps.
It was all about
bragging and bolstering.
Is all about talking about
the things that you had
versus the things that
somebody else did not have.
So we came in with
this idea of how --
we could talk about
something that's relevant
to us and our community.
And we were met with, like,
no, this is not going to work.
So thus, that's why if
you notice that none
of those records were
really on the radio.
They never got into the media.
>> Right.
>> They never -- the video --
we never made a video
that was acceptable on MTV
or any -- any of those outlets.
And --
>> Yet, everyone
knows their name.
>> Well, because -- because what
was going on in the community,
it resonated to the real core
people that was happening
on the streets in the community.
So therefore, when they --
when they heard the band
and they heard the messages
and they heard the group,
they wanted to get
more involved with it.
When they saw that this was not
just a particular solo artist
but it was actually a group, a
network of guys getting together
that necessarily not every
one of them was a rapper,
not all of them was a DJ,
not all of them were --
you know, they were
-- you had security
of the first [inaudible],
which was --
which was basically their homies
or their posse, if you would.
So you saw this kind of
like military, you know,
black national front
that was coming at you.
And it was like -- it was --
it was a bit much to kind
of digest, but once the --
once the kids knew what
it was all about --
>> You did it for the kids.
>> Exactly.
'Cause the kids understood
the concept of a posse.
They understood the
concept of a gain.
They understood that.
They understood that
so, therefore,
they resignated [sic] to that.
They were like, wow, we
can identify with this
because this was
speaking directly to us
and not to everybody else.
>> Yeah. Yet at the
same time, you sold also
in the white community.
>> Well, because of the
rebellion that was there.
I mean, at the same
time that was happening
in the black community,
well, punk was coming
up in the white community.
And it was -- and it was a thing
-- it was the same vibration,
the system and rebelling
against it.
And so what had happened
is it just --
it just so happened
that these two --
these two kind like situations
from two different sides
of the spectrum kind like
merged and stuck together
and became this symbol of --
of -- of freedom if you would,
and music culturally
and everything else.
That's why you got --
that's why you have a group
like Anthrax do -- and
Public Enemy coming together
to create Bring the
Noise a second time
>> Yeah. And yesterday
before we saw you speaking
at the LOHAS Conference, right,
here in Boulder, Colorado,
you know, you say, what?
The LOHAS?
It's like a lot of very
liberal, mostly white people,
middle-age white people, and you
are bringing a very important
message about this
transformation through music.
But before you went on, I
was sitting out in the lobby
and a man started up a
conversation with us,
about 50 years old, white guy.
And he was saying, "So
what are you doing?"
I said, Well, we're here
to see Hank Shocklee
and blah, blah, blah.
And he said, "Oh, man," he
said, "I was a white boy
in the suburbs in Boulder
and I loved Public Enemy."
You know, and it was, from him,
he came from it fairly
erudite family and all of that.
They were into law.
They were into protesting
against one
of the nuclear plants here.
And so I was looking at
him, and he said, "Yeah,
that's the music
that spoke to me."
And so that must've
been the case.
>> Because at the time
it was the only --
it was the only music
that was speaking
for some sort of change.
And if you think about it,
you know, and the reasons why
that I'm happy to be -- glad
to be at the LOHAS, you know,
Conference was because I see
the same things happening.
It's a revolution
that's happening.
And to me, the forefront
is affordable,
sustainable conscious health,
the whole vibration now is --
is a movement that --
that we have to undertake,
because we can't do anything
if our bodies are down.
>> Absolutely.
>> We can't -- if the -- you
know, you see what's going
on with the chemicals and the --
>> Oh, boy.
>> -- the spraying --
>> We're going to get into it.
>> -- and all that
stuff that's going on.
But it -- but as us, as
people, we have to --
we have to be conscious now,
and what that means is we have
to protect ourselves
in every aspect.
>> Absolutely.
Okay. So three's the '80s.
Public Enemy's on the scene.
We have the convergence of the
punk scene with the rap scene.
Now we go into the '90s.
What was happening then?
What was the consciousness you
were dealing with at the time?
>> Well, the '90s, you
know, started to --
started to move because
now you have to understand,
affluence is starting
to settle in.
So, you know, the one
thing that happens
with affluence comes
decadence, and with that,
everybody starts now
losing the big picture.
And so what we start -- what
started happening was we started
out something that was
conscious turned it to something
that was -- that they turned
the consciousness around.
And so now it became these kinds
of beasts within each other.
You know, so now you have
groups that are talking
about black-on-black
crime and things that of
that nature, you know.
Then the misogyny that comes
in with the lyrics
and everything else.
And so now what you have is
now the music is now starting
to turn on itself.
It's now starting to
implode the situation.
As more and more
success starts happening,
the more that starts to rise.
And so what you have
now is a situation
where now things have
become toxic because, yes,
there's nobody talking about
the issues that are going on,
and there are more
issues happening today
than it was in the '80s.
>> You bet.
I mean, at least we weren't
dealing with chemtrail's,
that we knew of at the time.
Okay. Let's move on
to 2000s up to now.
Once we hit the
turn-of-the-century to now.
>> Well, you know what starting
to happen now with the kids?
The kids are starting to realize
and they're taking
a double take.
The beautiful thing
about YouTube is the fact
that now you have the
ability to go back
and watch a Marvin Gaye video
and see what he was
talking about.
You can watch a Public
Enemy video and see.
You can watch an X Clan video
or KRS One video and see,
and you can listen to -- go back
and listen to early [inaudible]
and early Rock Kim,
and now you can start
to put the pieces
together that was missing.
Why isn't this music
still relevant?
Why isn't you hearing
this music today?
Why isn't, you know,
Common just as --
just as popular as Rick
Ross is on the radio.
And now kids are starting to
understand why I do want to be
like that stuff that's there.
I want to -- I want to
vibrate on this energy
over here, this positive energy.
Because if you give anybody
a choice between something
that is negative or something
that's positive, they're going
to pick the positive anyway.
So that's why you've
noticed that there's
so much negative
that's been projected.
So the kids now are starting to
revert back into do something
that -- they're going back
to their natural state.
They're going like, you know, I
want to vibrate on this music.
So now you're seeing a whole new
set of artists that are coming
up that are doing their side
and creating a movement
within themselves.
>> Who do you think are some
of the really good voices
out there right now?
>> Oh, man.
Tons of them, man.
Whether it be Amon Tobin,
who's a composer that's doing
some great things; you know,
Mala from Digital Mystikz is
doing some incredible things.
You have -- I mean, you
still got like groups
like that's a little bit older,
the Dave Matthews Band
that's doing some really,
really great things.
I mean, you have a lot of groups
-- that Jason Mraz is doing --
>> Yeah, wonderful.
Yeah.
>> -- some great things.
You have groups that
are out there now
that are I think are important.
And people is still
starting to understand --
they're starting to
understand their importance.
And so now they're starting to
do things like Alicia Keys going
to Africa and doing
some great things there.
You know, so you starting --
you starting to see that there's
things that's starting to happen
because people are tired
of watching this movie just
become self-destructive.
>> Absolutely.
And one thing that I'm noticing
is even in shows like this,
you know, the ones I do,
oftentimes I've thought,
how do I integrate
art into this?
I mean, art is coming
from the heart.
What we're doing is
sitting and chatting,
and even though the
heart's involved,
it's often very much
intellectual.
We're taking concepts via an
interview format for example.
But it's starting to occur to me
that art is going to be the lens
through which we start
elevating ourselves again.
And I mean, visual arts,
all the -- all the arts.
>> It always has been.
>> It has.
But to do it not like
an MTV way of doing it.
It has to be integrated into
society and media mechanisms
in a different way than it has
so that it's coming back to all
of us now, not just
by choice of music.
Do you know what I'm saying?
>> I get exactly
what you're saying.
And I think that for
me, you know, art is --
there's good are
and there's bad art.
To me, what's bad art is art
that does not vibrate
to your -- to you.
What it does is,
it disorients --
it disconnects you from reality.
Great art connects you.
And I think that what's
needed today is more avenues
for artists that are
making great art to have --
>> More platforms.
>> -- platforms [inaudible].
>> Absolutely.
That's not just isolated
to music fans.
>> Yes.
>> It has to start crossing over
into culture at large again.
>> Everybody's into music.
Music speaks to everybody.
>> So what are you doing now?
I mean, I know you're into
all kinds of music production,
and you've done a lot of
genres since your days
with Public Enemy
and the other groups.
So how are you looking it at --
I know you're starting something
called Shocklee Interactive is
going to be up in a while.
What is it you're trying to do?
What are you doing?
>> Well, I'm building a media
platform and a networking base
for artists that have
a conscious vibration.
And when I say "conscious,"
that doesn't mean that you have
to be overly seriously
conscious.
You just have to be for --
>> Thinking.
>> Exactly.
>> You have to think.
>> And that doesn't exist now.
If you look at all the --
the blogs and things
that are going on,
it's all about celebrities
and that thing.
I'm more bringing it back and
dealing with art and dealing
with the artists themselves.
So we been developing
Shocklee.com as a vehicle
for helping to express and
promote these artists and ideas.
>> Will it be like multi-media?
>> Yes.
>> Will there be some
ability to just like we are,
hold conversations
about things --
>> Of course.
>> -- in addition
to the performance?
>> We're developing
a network that we --
and we already do
what is -- tutorials.
We have our Ableton Live
users group, you know,
tutorials that we
produce through Tekserve.
And those are things
that we're developing.
But the main thing is for
us to create this kind
of like platform of awareness
and -- so that we can --
because, you know,
the beautiful thing
about the net is
that you can link.
And so our mission and
goal is to be able to link
to every conscious organization,
whether you're putting out,
you know, whether you're
putting out a fruit drink
or whether you're creating a
new software or whatever it is
that you're doing, we want
you to be able to link.
We want to link into people
that have media channels
and everything else, because
we want to create this kind
of like one big voice.
>> I saw your mission statement.
Very eloquent.
Beautiful.
I mean, and thoroughly
addressing the times,
that people are looking
for this change inside,
not only externally, which
is a little harder going
to change systems
on the outside.
But mostly to change the
internal thinking and systems.
And it sounds like what
you're doing is addressing it
straight on.
>> And I have to thank Joanne.
You know, she's been the
spearhead behind that.
She's the person that's
been putting the hammer down
and making sure that
all the nuts and bolts
and everything is all tight
and everything is working.
So hats off to her.
>> And you were talking
about networks
and you're talking
about collaboration.
I'm aware of a lot
of collaboration that's just
starting to be given birth
to behind the scenes
through a lot of entities
that are in alternative media.
For example, in one of them,
you're a big fan of,
the Alex Jones show.
You also -- I mean, that really
has kind of spoken to you
for a number of years.
So what are some -- talk just
a little bit about, Alex,
what draws you to some of
the other shows you're --
>> Alex, George Noory
Coast to Coast.
I mean -- and those are my
two favorites, you know.
Of course, I -- you
know, I follow --
I've been following
David Eick for years now.
So I kind of like know.
And, you know, I think that the
thing that I find that's really,
really cool and what's starting
to happen is there's starting
to be an awakening
that's going on.
>> Yes.
>> People are starting to
realize that, you know,
there's things that are not good
that's happening and we need
to start to address those issues
-- or at least look at them.
And I think -- and I think
that that's now the forefront
of becoming an informed public.
And I think that we need to
have more [inaudible] channels,
we need to have more shows
like Coast to Coast and Alex.
>> Yeah. Absolutely.
And what about -- you also
speak of the "new frequency."
>> Yes.
>> This is a term, if you look
you up online, you're going
to see the new frequency
spoken of.
What is the new frequency?
>> New frequency is
higher consciousness.
It's us leaving behind all our
petty differences, understanding
that race and religion
and sex and all
that stuff is a paradigm
that's out [inaudible] dated
and we start to think as human
beings, because our job is
for us as human beings
to live on,
for us to perpetually dominate
and take our rightful
place on this planet.
>> We're human beings, and the
false divisions really can't
survive much longer because
we're going to need each other.
Like you said, community,
collaboration,
all of it is really
where we're headed.
>> Because if you look at it
from we all breathe
the same air.
We all occupy the same space.
We all do -- everything
in our biological
systems are all the same.
So there's really
no differences.
And that's what that higher
consciousness is all about.
>> Absolutely.
And I was just reading this
morning, as I was thinking
about our interview, it was
going into my mind in that way,
which is, it was an
article on how 70 percent
of the American workforce
dislikes
or even hates their jobs, have
contempt often for their peers
or the managers and so forth,
and that it has turned into --
the workforce has
turned into more of a
"zombie land" is
the way they put it.
>> It's not designed for that.
You know, people are
not -- are not --
people want to be creative.
People want to feel a
sense of self-worth.
When you take away people's
ability to have self-worth
and then you put them in the box
and tell them they can only move
within this little
cubicle, well, then,
they're going to resent that.
That's just a human experience.
And that's -- and I think that's
part and parcel done purposely
so that they can create this
drone society that don't have --
that don't respond, that
don't have any emotions
or any feelings.
Emotion and feelings and all
these things are natural for us
that we supposed to express.
When we're not allowed
to express that,
then we're creating something
that's unnatural for us.
So what you see in terms of --
we just have a couple
minutes left --
in what you're observing, you
spoke to it a little bit ago,
with the youth, because
I'm a big fan
of the upcoming generations.
They seem to be coming in
with a little bit more wisdom
and sometimes a lot more
wisdom, a lot more ability.
What are you seeing out there?
>> Oh, I -- definitely.
I mean, what I see
is that's happening,
that the youth are talking what
we're talking about right here
and actually applying it.
Not only are they applying it,
they're taking it to new levels
at the levels that
they can take it at.
For example, you know,
the whole computer age,
the kids are using
computers and cell phones
like we would never
even imagine.
And they're networking
with them very efficiently.
And so they're taking the
stuff that they're given,
and they're actually applying
it to other situations
that creates a greater good.
Now, the question is,
is that they need help.
And this is where we come in,
where we should be
doing our job.
And I feel like me as an
adult, I've kind of failed them
in that respect because we
didn't set up institutions
that would allow them to be able
to manifest their
realities or their dreams.
>> But that's what
you're trying to do now.
>> Yes.
>> I mean, that's partly what
Shocklee Interactive is going
about, Shocklee.com.
And the other thing,
too, that --
that I think is really kind of
an unintended effect here is,
we're going into an era where
the species itself is beginning
to transform and transcend into
higher states of awareness,
as you talked about,
which also means
that we can operate more
beyond time and space,
telepathically for example.
That's becoming very common.
And these kids and
what they're doing,
their lives are almost
completely transparent.
>> Yes
>> And that, you
know, we're like, oh,
I don't want my personal details
to be known, but the reality is,
whether we like it or not,
we're going into a phase
of transparency all
with each other,
so we need to stop
the separation
and lying it seems to me.
>> Exactly.
Stop the fronting and
let's get down to business.
>> You bet.
It was a been an absolute
pleasure being with you, Hank.
Thank you so much for your time.
>> Thank you very much.
And thank everyone here.
>> Hank is becoming
involved in a number
of collaborations we spoke of on
the Internet, and you can keep
up with cutting -edge
work by going
to his website we
mentioned, Shocklee.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here at Gaiam TV.
[ Music ]